President Pizzah, Mr. Vice President, Governor, Congressman Thomas, Senator Wiley and Congressman Miller, Mr. Webb, Mr. Bell, scientists, distinguished guests at Ladies and Gentlemen. I appreciate your president having made me an honorary visiting professor and I will assure you that my first lecture will be a very brief. I am delighted to be here and I'm particularly delighted to be here on this occasion. We meet at a college noted for knowledge in a city noted for progress in a state noted for strength and we stand in need of all three. For we meet in an hour of change and challenge in a decade of hope and fear in an age of both knowledge and ignorance. The greater our knowledge in increases the greater our ignorance unfolds. Despite the striking fact that most of the scientists that the world has ever known are alive and working today, despite the fact that this nation's own scientific manpower is doubling every 12 years in a rate of growth more than three times that of our population as a whole, despite that. the unanswered and the unfinished, still far outstripped our collective comprehension. No man can fully grasp how far and how fast we have come. But condense, if you will, the 50,000 years of man's recorded history in a time span of about a half a century, stated in the end of the book, In these terms, we know very little about the first 40 years, except at the end of them, advance men had learned to use the skins of animals to cover them. Then about 10 years ago, under this standard, man emerged from his caves to construct other kinds of shelter. Only five years ago, man learned to write and use a cock with wheels. And he began less than two years. ago. The printing press came this year and then less than two months ago during this whole 50-year span of human history, the steam engine provided a new source of power. Newton explored the meaning of gravity. Last month, electric lights and telephones and automobiles and airplanes became available. Only last week did we develop penicillin. and television and nuclear power. And now, if America's new spacecraft succeeds in reaching Venus, we will have literally reached the stars before midnight tonight. This is a breathtaking pace, and such a pace cannot help, but create new ills as it dispels old, new ignorance, new problems, new dangers. Surely the opening visitors of space, promise high costs, and hardships, as well as high reward. So it is not surprising that some would have us stay where we are a little longer to rest, to wait. But this city of Houston, this state of Texas, this country of the United States was not built by those who waited and rested and wished to look behind them. This country was conquered by those who moved forward and so will space. William Bradford, speaking in 1630 of the founding of the Plymouth Bay Colony, said that all great and honorable actions are accompanied with great difficulties, and both must be and apprised and also overcome with answerable courage. If this capsule history of our progress teaches us anything, it is that man and his quest for knowledge and progress is determined and cannot be deterred. The exploration of space will go ahead, whether we join in it or not, and it is one of the great adventures of all time. And no nation which expects to be the leader of other nations to stay behind in this race for space. Those who came before us made certain that this country rolled the first waves of the industrial revolution, the first waves of modern invention, and the first wave of nuclear power. And this generation does not intend to founder in the backwash of the coming age of space. We mean to be a part of it. We mean to lead it. For the eyes of the world, now look into space to the moon and to the planets beyond. And we have vowed that we shall not see it governed by a hostile flag of conquest, but by a banner of freedom and peace. We have vowed that we shall not see space filled with weapons of mass destruction but with instruments of knowledge and understanding yet the vows of this nation can only be fulfilled if we in this nation are first and therefore we intend to be first. Thank you very much. our leadership in science and industry, our hopes for peace and security, our obligations to ourselves, as well as others, all require us to make this effort, to solve these mysteries, to solve them for the good of all men, and to become the world's leading space-faring nation. We set sail on this new sea, because there is new knowledge to be gained, and new world's leading space. rights to be won, and they must be won and used for the progress of all people. For space science, like nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own. Whether it will become a force for good or ill depends on man. And only if the United States occupies a position of preeminence, can we help decide whether this will be a sea of peace or a new terrifying dinner of war. I do not say that we should or will go unprotected against the hostile misuse of space any more than we go unprotected against the hostile use of land or sea. But I do say that space can be explored and mastered without feeding the fires of war without repeating the matter. States that man has made and extending his writ around this globe of ours. There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. It hasens a hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again. But why some say the moon. Why choose this as our goal. And they may well ask why climb the highest mountain, why 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic, why does rice play Texas? We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon. We choose to go to the moon and this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy but because they are high. God, because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we're willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others too. It is for these reasons that I regard the decision last year to shift our efforts in space from low to high gear as among the most important decisions that will be made during my in-compancy in the office of the presidency. In the last 24 hours, we have seen facilities now being created for the greatest and most complex exploration in man's history. We have felt the ground shake and the air shattered by the testing of a Saturn, C1 booster rocket. Many times as powerful the Atlas which launched John Glamour. Generating power equivalents to 10,000 automobiles with their accelerator on the floor. We have seen the site where five F1 rocket engines, each one is powerful, as all eight engines of the Saturn combined will be clustered together to make the advanced Saturn missile assembled in a new building to be built at Cape Canaveral. tall as a 48-story structure, as wide as a city block, and as long as two lengths of this field. Within these last 19 months, at least 45 satellites have circled the Earth. Some 40 of them were made in the United States of America, and they were far more sophisticated and supplied far more knowledge to the people of the world than those of the Soviet Union. The Mariner spacecraft. The Mariner Spacecraft, now in its way to Venus, is the most intricate instrument in the history of space science. The accuracy of that shot is comparable to firing a missile from Cape Canaveral and dropping it in this stadium between the 40-yard lines. The rocket satellites are helping our ships at sea to steer a safer course. Tire is that lights that give us unprecedented warnings of hurricanes and storms and we'll do the same for far as five and icebergs. We have had after you, but so are others, even if they do not admit them and they may be less public. To be sure, to be sure we are behind and will be behind for some time in man flight. But we do not intend to stay behind behind and in this decade we shall make up and move ahead. The growth of our science and education will be enriched by new knowledge of our universe and environment, by new techniques of learning and mapping and observation, by new tools and computers for industry, medicine and the whole as well as the school. Technical information is available on the website. institutions such as Rice will reap the harvest of these games. And finally, the space effort itself, while still in its infancy, has already created a great number of new companies and tens and thousands of new jobs. Space and related industries are generating new demands in investment and skilled personnel. And this city and this state and this region will share greatly in this growth. What was once the furthest outpost on the old frontier of the West will be the furthest outpost on the new frontier of science and space. Houston, your city of Houston, with its manned spacecraft, will become the heart of a large scientific and engineering community. During the next five years, the National and space administration expects to double the number of scientists and engineers in this area to increase its outlays for salaries and expenses to $60 million a year to invest some $200 million in plan and laboratory facilities and to direct our contract for new space efforts over one billion dollars from this center in this city to be sure all